[GSoC] Summary for Project 6: Push-based Metrics Collection (#155)
kubeflow/blog: _posts/2024-09-28-gsoc-2024-summary-push-basd-metrics-collection.md

---
title: "Kubeflow and Me: A Story Started with Push-based Metrics Collection"
layout: post
toc: false
comments: true
image: images/logo.png
hide: false
categories: [gsoc]
permalink: /gsoc-2024-project-6/
author: "Shao Wang(Electronic-Waste)"
---

This summer, I gained a precious opportunity to participate in the Google Summer of Code(GSoC), in which I would contribute to Katib and fulfill a project named ["Push-based Metrics Collection in Katib"](https://www.kubeflow.org/events/gsoc-2024/#project-6-push-based-metrics-collection-for-katib) within 12 weeks. 

> Firstly, I got to know about GSoC and Kubeflow with the recommendation from the former active maintainer Ce Gao(gaocegege)'s personal blog. And deeply impressed by the idea of cloud native AI toolkits, I decided to have a dip into this area and learn some skills to enhance my competence for career life in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, I got to know about GSoC and Kubeflow with the recommendation from the former active maintainer Ce Gao(gaocegege)'s personal blog. And I was deeply impressed by the idea of cloud native AI toolkits, I decided to have a dip into this area and learn some skills to enhance my competence for career life in the future.
```

In the blog, I'll provide my personal insight into Katib, for those who are interested in cloud native, AI, and hyperparameters tuning.

> ## Goal

Reviewer 2: This is great, you could also separate into Problem and Solution, just to make it more clear to the audience, but the description is very good.

Author: SGTM:)

The project aims to provide a Python SDK API interface for users to push metrics to Katib DB directly.

The current implementation of Metrics Collector is pull-based, raising design problems such as determining the frequency at which we scrape the metrics, performance issues like the overhead caused by too many sidecar containers, and restrictions on developing environments that must support sidecar containers and admission webhooks. And also, for data scientists, they need to pay attention to the format of metrics printed in the training scripts, which is error prone and may be hard to recognize.

Thus, we decided to implement a new API for Katib Python SDK to offer users a push-based way to store metrics directly into the Kaitb DB and resolve those issues raised by pull-based metrics collection.

![](../images/2024-09-28-gsoc-2024-summary-push-based-metrics-collection/push-based-metrics-collection.png)

> ## What I did in GSoC Project

Reviewer 2: Suggestions:

My contributions during the GSoC

Author: Got it!

> I raised numerous PRs for the Katib and Training-Operator project. Some of them are related to my GSoC project, and others may contribute to the completeness of UTs, simplicity of dependency package, and the compatibility of UI component, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I raised numerous PRs for the Katib and Training-Operator project. Some of them are related to my GSoC project, and others may contribute to the completeness of UTs (Unit Tests), simplicity of dependency management, and the compatibility of the UI component.
```

For reference, the coding period can be rougly divided into 3 stages:

> 1. Convert the proposal to KEP and discuss with mentors about the architecture, API design, etc. (~4 weeks)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Convert the proposal to a KEP and discuss the architecture, API design, etc. (~4 weeks) with the mentors
```

> 2. Develop push-based metrics collection interface according to the KEP. (~8 weeks)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Develop a push-based metrics collection interface according to the KEP. (~8 weeks)
```

> 3. Write some examples and documentations & Present my work to Kubeflow Community. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Write some examples and documentation & Present my work to the Kubeflow Community. 
```

> Also, I raised some issues not only to describe the problems and bugs I met during the coding period, but also to suggest the future enhancement direction for Katib and Training-Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, I raised some issues not only to describe the problems and bugs I met during the coding period, but also to suggest the future enhancement direction for Katib and the Training-Operator.
```

> There is an [Github Issue](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/issues/2340) tracks the progress of developing push-based metrics collection for katib during the GSoC coding phase. If interested in my work or Katib, you can check this issue for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a [Github Issue](https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/issues/2340) that tracks the progress of developing the push-based metrics collection for katib during the GSoC coding phase. If you interested in my work or Katib, you can check this issue for more details.
```

> ## Lessons I Learned during the Project

Reviewer 2: suggestions, I'd keep just : Lessons learned  as subtitle.

Author: Nice suggestion!

1. **Think Twice, Code Once**: Andrey taught me that we should think of the API specification and all the related details before coding. This can significantly reduce the workload of the coding period and avoid big refactor of the project. Meanwhile, my understanding of Katib got clear gradually during the over-and-over rounds of re-think and re-design of the architecture.

2. **Dive into the Source Code**: Engineering projects nowadays are extremely complex and need much effort to understand them. The best way to get familiar with the project is to dive into the source code and run several examples.

> 3. **Communication**: Communication is the most important thing when we collaborate with others. Expressing your idea precisely and making others understand you easily are significant skills not only in open source community but also in various scenes such as company and group works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Communication**: Communication is the most important thing when collaborating with others. Expressing your idea precisely and making others understand you easily are significant skills not only in the open source community but also in various scenarios such as at a company and in group work.
```

2. To [@gaocegege](https://github.com/gaocegege). You recommend me to the Kubeflow Community. Thanks for your patient answers for my endless silly questions.

3. To Google. Thanks for offering such a precious opportunity for me to begin my journey in the open source world!

I hold a firm belief that every small step counts, and everybody in the community is unique and of great significance. There is no doubt that our joint efforts will surely contribute to the flourishing of our Kubeflow Community, make it the world-best community managing AI lifecycle on Kubernetes, and attract much more attention from the industry. Then, more and more new comers will pour in and work along with us.

> Again, I'll continue to contribute to Kubeflow.

Reviewer 2: is there any call to action we could include here for the readers? 
such as learn more about kubeflow or GSCOC 2025? or any other blog post you want to link here.

Author: What about putting the kubeflow official website and the idea list of GSoC'25 here? It might be useful for readers to know more about kubeflow and GSoC.

Firstly, I got to know about GSoC and Kubeflow with the recommendation from the former active maintainer Ce Gao(gaocegege)'s personal blog. And I was deeply impressed by the idea of cloud native AI toolkits, I decided to dive into this area and learn some skills to enhance my career and future.
In the blog, I'll provide my personal insight into Katib, for those who are interested in cloud native, AI, and hyperparameters tuning.

## Problem

The project aims to provide a Python SDK API interface for users to push metrics to Katib DB directly.

The current implementation of Metrics Collector is pull-based, raising design problems such as determining the frequency at which we scrape the metrics, performance issues like the overhead caused by too many sidecar containers, and restrictions on developing environments that must support sidecar containers and admission webhooks. And also, for data scientists, they need to pay attention to the format of metrics printed in the training scripts, which is error prone and may be hard to recognize.

> ## Solution

Reviewer 3: @Electronic-Waste It would be also nice if you could update this information with these:
1. Briefly explain how the new push-based API works
2. Link to the Kubeflow docs for the mode information
3. Add you Notebook example: https://github.com/kubeflow/katib/blob/master/examples/v1beta1/sdk/mnist-with-push-metrics-collection.ipynb

Author: Sure. I'll add these.
